1. Dal bhat, the national dish
Dal bhat (or daal bhat) is the quintessential Nepali meal and forms the backbone of the country's cuisine. It consists of steamed rice (bhat) served with a lentil soup (dal) and is accompanied by an array of side dishes.Dal bhat can be simple or fancy depending on where you are.While dal may appear simple at first, it's packed with flavour as it uses various spices like turmeric, cumin and coriander. And you're always given sides of vegetables, as well as sometimes achar (spicy pickles), dahi (curd or yoghurt), papad (poppadam) or chapati (unleavened bread). You can also often opt for a side of fish, chicken, goat or water buffalo."What makes dal bhat truly special is the harmony of flavours on the plate, along with the nutritional value it offers, which makes it a satisfying and wholesome meal."Dal bhat is generally served in various vessels and you mix it together

---

2. Momos, Nepal's best-loved street food
Momos are delicious dumplings found on almost every street corner of Nepal. You can also enjoy upmarket versions in restaurants. In fact, momos are now so widespread that they've become a recognisable staple of the national cuisine.
Momos consist of a thin, doughy shell stuffed with a variety of fillings, including minced meat (usually buffalo or chicken), vegetables or cheese. They're typically served steamed or fried and come with a tangy dipping sauce.
The dough used in momos is often hand-rolled to perfection, resulting in delicate, mouthwatering parcels of flavour.
"Be sure to try both the classic steamed momos as well as the crispy fried ones for a proper introduction to the momo way of life!"

---

3. Thukpa, the perfect trekking meal
Thukpa is a warming Tibetan noodle soup that has made its way into Nepali cuisine, especially in the northern regions bordering Tibet.
This hearty soup features hand-pulled wheat noodles, tender pieces of meat (often yak or chicken), and a flavourful broth made with herbs and spices.
"Thukpa is perfect for warming up in the chilly Himalayan weather after a long day of trekking as it offers a thoroughly comforting and nourishing meal."

---

4. Kwati, a veggies stew with a nutritional kick
Kwati is a wholesome and nutritious soup made from a mix of nine different types of sprouted beans and lentils!
The beans and lentils used to make kwati are soaked and allowed to sprout, enhancing their nutritional value. The sprouts are then slow-cooked with a variety of spices to create a thick, flavoursome soup that's both hearty and healthy.
Kwati (or nakpi kwati) is commonly prepared during the Hindu festival of Janai Purnima, which is all about the bond of purity and security.
This festival (also known as Raksha Bandhan or Sacred Thread Festival) usually falls on the day of the full moon in the Nepali month of Shrawan (July or August).

---

5. Sekuwa, the perfect barbecue dish
Sekuwa is a mouthwatering Nepali barbecue dish that features marinated and skewered pieces of meat (usually buffalo, chicken or pork).
The meat used to make sekuwa is marinated in garlic, ginger and mustard oil, among other spices. It's then grilled over an open flame, giving it a delightfully charred and smoky taste.
Sekuwa is often served with beaten rice, pickles and a side of mint and coriander (cilantro) chutney.

---

6. Chatamari, or 'Nepali Pizza'
Chatamari is a traditional Newari dish that's a must-try for anyone visiting Nepal. It consists of a thin rice flour crepe topped with a variety of ingredients, such as minced meat, vegetables, eggs and spices. The end story is a savoury and flavourful pizza-like dish with a unique texture.
A Newari dish (Chatamari) also known as Nepali Pizza served on a brass plate.
Chatamari can look like many different things depending on who is making it.
The Newars are an indigenous community of the Kathmandu Valley who have their own unique cuisine that's a must-try for any food enthusiast visiting Nepal.
"Newari cuisine is renowned for its rich flavours and intricate dishes."
Chatamari is usually enjoyed as a light meal, so it's a great one to pick up in a market during a day of exploring when you discover your energy is waning.

---

7. Sha phaley, a Sherpa speciality
Sha phaley (or shakpa or shapta) is a popular dish in the Mt Everest region of eastern Nepal. If you go trekking to Everest Base Camp, then this is a great local dish to try!
Sha phaley is basically a Tibetan dish of bread stuffed with seasoned red meat.
Sha phaley consists of thinly sliced red meat, often beef, that's been stir-fried with aromatic spices, which include chilli and Sichuan pepper. It's served with steamed rice or Tibetan bread, such as tingmo, and chilli sauce.
"Sha phaley is a locally beloved dish for its bold and complex flavours; it combines the heat of chillies with the unique tingling sensation of Sichuan pepper."
Sometimes sha phaley includes a variety of vegetables, which add lots of colour and nutrients to the dish.

---

8. Tsampa, an energy-packed food
If you go trekking in the Himalayas near the border of China, you'll find people who are ethnically and culturally linked to Tibet, and hence favour traditional Tibetan dishes like tsampa.
Tsampa is a simple but highly nutritious and energy-rich dish made from roasted barley flour. You find it served up in many forms: dough balls, soup, toppings, and even as a butter tea.
We highly recommend that those trekking in the Tibetan-influenced regions of the Nepali Himalayas try some tsampa, as it's a fantastic source of energy!
"Tsampa holds great cultural and dietary significance in Tibetan cuisine and is often referred to as the Tibetan national food."

---

9. Sel roti, a quintessential Nepali treat
Sel roti is a traditional Nepali, especially Newar, rice-based doughnut or ring-shaped bread. It's the perfect on-the-go treat when out and about in Kathmandu!
You make sel roti by mixing rice flour with sugar, milk and spices to create a thick batter. This batter is then deep-fried to perfection, resulting in a crispy outer layer and a soft, chewy inside.
If you want to really feel like a local, have your sel roti with a cup of tea. But be warned: its sweet and slightly savoury taste makes it a bit addictive!